---
layout: post
title:      "How Did I Decide to Make a Switch from Chemistry to Data Science?"
date:       2020-04-22 15:18:13 +0000
permalink:  how_did_i_decide_to_make_a_switch_from_chemistry_to_data_science
---


Everyone probably has their own list of things that they wish to do if they have more spare time. In this year of 2020, with the occurrence of COVID19, people now have more time because of the stay-at-home order. This pandemic might be bad to a lot of people as they lose their jobs, companies down-sized, local businesses such as restaurants suffered as there was no gathering more than ten people and so on. On the other hand, this pandemic was also an opportunity for some people to have things on their checklist done such as learning a new language, starting to play an instrument, spending more time with their families. Myself was not an exception. 

I earned a Bachelor of Science degree in Chemistry and had been in this chemical field for two years. With the start of the recession from 2019 and the corona virus in 2020, the oil and gas field suffered a lot. As a result, the company had to let me go. Yes, I was very sad and depressed. However, as days went by, I knew that I was not the only who had to go through this hard time. I opened up my checklist as well as used this free time to have deep thinking about my career and what I really want. Back in college, I chose this STEM major because I really love the feeling of finding out a solution for a challenging problem or completing a project. Nevertheless, after getting my feet into the industry, I realized that it was not like what I imagined in college. A chemical research usually takes couple of years to complete, so my lab work was repetitive on a daily basic. I sometimes found myself feeling bored or had a hard time to come to work as there was not much of motivation. On the other hand, I define myself as a person who love the ideas of sustainability. At home, I reuse, reduce and recycle as much as I can. However, at work, there was no way I could practice sustainability. There was a lot of waste in terms of lab debris and harmful chemicals. Sometimes, my friends laugh at me because I bring my own stainless-steel straws to the restaurants or coffee shops while working at a polymer company. With all the factors combined, I finally realized that this chemical field was no longer suitable for me. I spent much time to research for a new career path which needs to align with my desire of finding out the solutions for challenging problems in a reasonable time period, my living norms about sustainability, and something that has a bright future of development. After researching and talking to my friends in various fields, I made my final decision to try out technology field. 

Technology field or tech field is a very broad field with numerous sub-majors. Therefore, I knew that I needed to consult with someone who is already in the field and know what is in demand now and also in the future. Luckily, I had a very close friend who is currently a computer scientist at Google. She loves my idea about switching to tech field. She gave me some advices and told me that I should try out Data Science. Why? Because as a person who made a completely switch from a non-related tech major to tech field, I would probably feel overwhelmed with coding and all the difficult coding languages. Therefore, going directly for computer science or software engineering major is not a very smart move for my case. Data science seems to be a suitable major in the tech field for someone like me as it involves coding but not so “hard-core” like computer science. It also involves working on different projects and logistics which I like since college. 

I now know that I want to learn how to become a data scientist. The only barriers right now are time and finances. Although I earned my bachelor degree two years ago, I am not young anymore as I started college late. I could not spend years to go back to college to earn another bachelor degree. Moreover, it also would cost me a huge amount of college loan. With the introduction from my friends, I found out about Flatiron School. It is a school that provides intensive boot-camps for different technology-related majors such as data science. As little as half of a year, I will gain essential technical knowledge about data science as well as building several projects to put in my portfolio to make myself marketable to future employers. On the other hand, the tuition and fee is very reasonable. They also help with resume building, mock interviews, connecting with employers and even having a money back guarantee if I do not receive a job offer within six month of graduation. 

My decisions to make a switch in my career and attend an intensive boot-camp were not easy. I know this journey will be hard. There will be up and down moments. However, I know that I made the right decision after three weeks at Flatiron. I learned a lot more than I imagined and I now have a better understanding about data science. I am truly excited to start my career as a data scientist with the help from Flatiron.

